chore: add Uptrace integration (#2148)
RedisLabs/redislabs-docs: content/rs/clusters/monitoring/uptrace-integration.md

---

To collect, display, and monitor metrics data from your databases and other cluster components, you can connect Uptrace to your Redis Enterprise cluster using OpenTelemetry Collector.

[Uptrace](https://uptrace.dev/get/) is an open-source APM tool that supports distributed tracing, metrics, and logs. You can use it to monitor applications and set up automatic alerts to receive notifications.

[OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) allows to receive, process and export telemetry data in a vendor-agnostic way. You can use it to scrape Prometheus metrics provided by Redis and then export those metrics to Uptrace or any other tool.

You can use Uptrace to:

- Collect and display data metrics not available in the [admin console]({{< relref "/rs/clusters/monitoring/console-metrics-definitions.md" >}}).
- Get access to pre-built dashboard templates maintained by Uptrace community.
- Set up automatic alerts and receive notifications via email, Slack, Telegram, and others.
- Monitor your app performance and logs using [tracing](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/distributed-tracing.html).

![uptrace-redis-nodes](/images/rs/uptrace-redis-nodes.png)

> ## Installing Collector and Uptrace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install Collector and Uptrace
```

Because installing OpenTelemetry Collector and Uptrace can take some time, you can use the [docker-compose](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace/tree/master/example/redis-enterprise) example that also comes with Redis Enterprise cluster and AlertManager.

> Alternatively, you can try the following guides to explore all available options:
> 
> <!-- The first link could point to the official Otel doc, but it focuses on installing otelcol instead of otelcol-contrib which is required here -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternative installation guides include:
```

- [Getting started with OpenTelemetry Collector](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/collector.html)
- [Getting started with Uptrace](https://uptrace.dev/get/install.html)

> Either way, after installing Uptrace you should have Uptrace UI available at [http://localhost:14318/](http://localhost:14318/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you install Uptrace, you can access the Uptrace UI at [http://localhost:14318/](http://localhost:14318/).
```

> ## Scraping Prometheus metrics

Reviewer: We also might want to consider changing the **Scrape Prometheus metrics** instructions to a numbered list of steps.
```suggestion
## Scrape Prometheus metrics
```

  endpoint: "localhost:8070" # Redis Cluster endpoint
  metrics_path: "/"
  tls:
    insecure: false
    insecure_skip_verify: true
    min_version: "1.0"
```

Next, you can export the collected metrics to Uptrace using OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP):

```yaml
# otel-collector.yaml

receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
      http:

exporters:
  otlp:
    # Uptrace is accepting metrics on this port
    endpoint: localhost:14317
    headers: { "uptrace-dsn": "http://project1_secret_token@localhost:14317/1" }
    tls:
      insecure: true

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp, prometheus_simple/cluster1]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
```

Don't forget to restart the Collector and then check logs for any errors:

```shell
docker-compose logs otel-collector

# or

sudo journalctl -u otelcol-contrib -f
```

You can also check the full OpenTelemetry Collector config [here](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace/blob/master/example/redis-enterprise/otel-collector.yaml).

> ## Viewing metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## View metrics
```

When metrics start arriving to Uptrace, you should see a couple of dashboards in the Metrics tab. In total, Uptrace should create 3 dashboards for Redis Enterprise metrics:

> - "Redis: Nodes" dashboard displays a list of cluster nodes with ability to click on a node to view node metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Redis: Nodes" dashboard displays a list of cluster nodes. You can select a node to view its metrics.
```

- "Redis: Databases" displays a list of Redis databases in all cluster nodes. To find a specific database, you can use filters or sort the table by columns.

> - "Redis: Shards" contains a list of shards that you have in all cluster nodes. Just like with other dashboards, you can filter/sort shards and click on a shard to get more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Redis: Shards" contains a list of shards that you have in all cluster nodes. You can filter or sort shards and select a shard for more details.
```

> ## Monitoring metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Monitor metrics
```

```yaml
# uptrace.yml

alerting:
  rules:
    - name: Redis shard is down
      metrics:
        - redis_up as $redis_up
      query:
        - group by cluster
        - group by bdb
        - group by node
        - $redis_up == 0
      for: 5m # for 5 minutes
      projects: [1] # in projects #1
```

You can also create queries with more complex expressions, for example, to alert when the keyspace hit rate is lower than 75% or memory fragmentation is too high:

```yaml
# uptrace.yml

alerting:
  rules:
    - name: Redis read hit rate < 75%
      metrics:
        - redis_keyspace_read_hits as $hits
        - redis_keyspace_read_misses as $misses
      query:
        - group by cluster
        - group by bdb
        - group by node
        - $hits / ($hits + $misses) < 0.75
      for: 5m
      projects: [1]

    - name: Memory fragmentation is too high
      metrics:
        - redis_used_memory as $mem_used
        - redis_mem_fragmentation_ratio as $fragmentation
      query:
        - group by cluster
        - group by bdb
        - group by node
        - $mem_used > 32mb and $fragmentation > 3
      for: 5m
      projects: [1]
```

> ## Conclusion
> 
> TODO: some final words and links to the blog etc

Reviewer: I think it would be okay to remove the conclusion section unless you want to replace it with a **More info** section and add a few useful links.
```suggestion
```

[Uptrace](https://uptrace.dev/get/) is an open source application performance monitoring (APM) tool that supports distributed tracing, metrics, and logs. You can use it to monitor applications and set up automatic alerts to receive notifications.

With [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/), you can receive, process, and export telemetry data to any monitoring tool. You can use it to scrape Prometheus metrics provided by Redis and then export those metrics to Uptrace.

You can use Uptrace to:

- Collect and display data metrics not available in the [admin console]({{< relref "/rs/clusters/monitoring/console-metrics-definitions.md" >}}).
- Use prebuilt dashboard templates maintained by the Uptrace community.
- Set up automatic alerts and receive notifications via email, Slack, Telegram, and others.
- Monitor your app performance and logs using [tracing](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/distributed-tracing.html).

![uptrace-redis-nodes](/images/rs/uptrace-redis-nodes.png)

## Install Collector and Uptrace

> Because installing OpenTelemetry Collector and Uptrace can take some time, you can use the [docker-compose](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace/tree/master/example/redis-enterprise) example that also comes with Redis Enterprise cluster and Alertmanager.

Reviewer: It looks like the Uptrace docs use "AlertManager" rather than "Alertmanager".
```suggestion
Because installing OpenTelemetry Collector and Uptrace can take some time, you can use the [docker-compose](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace/tree/master/example/redis-enterprise) example that also comes with Redis Enterprise cluster and AlertManager.
```

> But you can also install OpenTelemetry and Uptrace from scratch using the following guides:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install OpenTelemetry and Uptrace from scratch using the following guides:
```

      exporters: [otlp]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp, prometheus_simple/cluster1]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
```

Don't forget to restart the Collector and then check logs for any errors:

```shell
docker-compose logs otel-collector

# or

sudo journalctl -u otelcol-contrib -f
```

You can also check the full OpenTelemetry Collector config [here](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace/blob/master/example/redis-enterprise/otel-collector.yaml).

## View metrics

When metrics start arriving to Uptrace, you should see a couple of dashboards in the Metrics tab. In total, Uptrace should create 3 dashboards for Redis Enterprise metrics:

- "Redis: Nodes" dashboard displays a list of cluster nodes. You can select a node to view its metrics.

- "Redis: Databases" displays a list of Redis databases in all cluster nodes. To find a specific database, you can use filters or sort the table by columns.

- "Redis: Shards" contains a list of shards that you have in all cluster nodes. You can filter or sort shards and select a shard for more details.

## Monitor metrics

> To start monitoring metrics, you need to add some alerting rules, for example, the following rule creates an alert whenever an individual Redis shard is down which is ensured by the `group by node` expression:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start monitoring metrics, you need to add some alerting rules.

For example, the following rule uses the `group by node` expression to create an alert whenever an individual Redis shard is down:
```

```yaml
# /etc/uptrace/uptrace.yml

alerting:
  rules:
    - name: Redis shard is down
      metrics:
        - redis_up as $redis_up
      query:
        - group by cluster # monitor each cluster,
        - group by bdb # each database,
        - group by node # and each shard
        - $redis_up == 0
      # shard should be down for 5 minutes to trigger an alert
      for: 5m
      # only monitor Uptrace projects with these ids
      projects: [1]
```

> You can also create queries with more complex expressions, for example, to alert when the keyspace hit rate is lower than 75% or memory fragmentation is too high:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create queries with more complex expressions.

For example, the following rules create an alert when the keyspace hit rate is lower than 75% or memory fragmentation is too high:
```

```yaml
# /etc/uptrace/uptrace.yml

alerting:
  rules:
    - name: Redis read hit rate < 75%
      metrics:
        - redis_keyspace_read_hits as $hits
        - redis_keyspace_read_misses as $misses
      query:
        - group by cluster
        - group by bdb
        - group by node
        - $hits / ($hits + $misses) < 0.75
      for: 5m
      projects: [1]

    - name: Memory fragmentation is too high
      metrics:
        - redis_used_memory as $mem_used
        - redis_mem_fragmentation_ratio as $fragmentation
      query:
        - group by cluster
        - group by bdb
        - group by node
        - $mem_used > 32mb and $fragmentation > 3
      for: 5m
      projects: [1]
```

You can learn more about the query language [here](https://uptrace.dev/get/querying-metrics.html).

## Send notifications

> Uptrace does not manage notifications by itself and instead provides an [integration](https://uptrace.dev/get/alerting.html) with Alertmanager.
> 
> Alertmanager handles alerts sent by client applications such as Uptrace and takes care of deduplicating, grouping, and routing notifications to configured receivers via email, Slack, Telegram, and many others.
> 
> To start creating Alertmanager alerts, you need to tell Uptrace how to reach AlertManager:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uptrace does not manage notifications by itself and instead provides an [integration](https://uptrace.dev/get/alerting.html) with AlertManager.

AlertManager handles alerts sent by client applications such as Uptrace and takes care of deduplicating, grouping, and routing notifications to configured receivers via email, Slack, Telegram, and many others.

To connect Uptrace to AlertManager and enable alert notifications, add the AlertManager API endpoint to uptrace.yml:
```

With [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/), you can receive, process, and export telemetry data to any monitoring tool. You can use it to scrape Prometheus metrics provided by Redis and then export those metrics to Uptrace.

You can use Uptrace to:

- Collect and display data metrics not available in the [admin console]({{< relref "/rs/clusters/monitoring/console-metrics-definitions.md" >}}).
- Use prebuilt dashboard templates maintained by the Uptrace community.
- Set up automatic alerts and receive notifications via email, Slack, Telegram, and others.
- Monitor your app performance and logs using [tracing](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/distributed-tracing.html).

![uptrace-redis-nodes](/images/rs/uptrace-redis-nodes.png)

## Install Collector and Uptrace

Because installing OpenTelemetry Collector and Uptrace can take some time, you can use the [docker-compose](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace/tree/master/example/redis-enterprise) example that also comes with Redis Enterprise cluster and AlertManager.

> The docker example contains the following files that can edit before starting Docker containers:
> 
> - `otel-collector.yaml` - OpenTelemetry Collector config that you can find inside the running Collector container at `/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml`.
> - `uptrace.yml` - Uptrace config that you can find inside the Uptrace container at `/etc/uptrace/uptrace.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you download the Docker example, you can edit the following configuration files in the `uptrace/example/redis-enterprise` directory before you start the Docker containers:

- `otel-collector.yaml` - Configures `/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml` in the OpenTelemetry Collector container.
- `uptrace.yml` - Configures`/etc/uptrace/uptrace.yml` in the Uptrace container.
```
